As our commenters bring out,
our focus today is on something
that is actually very private
and perhaps very sensitive,
and that is our motives.
Motives dwell deep within our figurative hearts.
They really are described
as “the impelling force behind our conduct”
and decision-making.
But today, our text puts us on alert
about these motives,
and we need to have
Jehovah’s viewpoint of them.
Let’s consider the full scripture.
Open your Bibles, please, to Proverbs 16:2.
We’re alerted to this
because, as we’ve already discussed,
motives are an impelling force.
They can help us
do what is right in God’s eyes,
but they also can deceive us
into doing what is wrong.
Notice what the Bible says about this;
Proverbs 16:2 says:
“All of man’s ways seem right to him,
but Jehovah examines the motives.”
Interesting.
We could set a very good goal for ourselves
—be involved in what appears
to be very good things.
But if, as the Bible says,
our ways or our thoughts may appear good
but Jehovah examines them
and he sees that our motives are not pure,
or not in total harmony with his will,
well, we could meet up with his disapproval
and even sharp judgment.
How, then,
can we make sure that our motives are pure
and that they are pleasing to Jehovah God?
In order to understand that,
we have to understand our hearts
because this is where our motives reside
—in our figurative hearts.
An important aspect of our hearts
is brought out for us in Jeremiah 17:9.
Remember, it says there
that “the heart is more treacherous
“than anything else and is desperate.
Who can know it?”
You see, our imperfect figurative hearts
are inherently selfish.
It thinks of only one thing,
and that is itself.
And our hearts could deceive us
into justifying errors on our part
or even justifying self-seeking actions,
using Jehovah’s service
for our own personal benefit.
Now, this is a dangerous thing.
A case in point is brought out for us.
If you look at the cross-reference
to this scripture
at 1 Samuel 15:13, 14—
In fact, let’s open our Bibles
to that portion of the scripture.
It’s the account of King Saul,
and Jehovah God
gave King Saul very definite directions
on what he wanted him to do,
and that was
to completely annihilate the Amalekites
from the greatest to the least of them.
He was to get rid of them.
Now, if we look at verses 5 through 7,
we see that Saul took on this assignment,
and he was doing rather well.
He was doing exactly
what Jehovah had told him to do,
and that was to annihilate the Amalekites.
But in verse 9,
we see that something went wrong
—something changed.
In verse 9, it says:
“However, Saul and the people
“spared Agag [who was the king]
and the best of the flock, the herd,
“the fattened animals, the rams,
and all that was good.
“They did not want
to devote them to destruction.
“But all the goods
that were worthless and unwanted,
these they devoted to destruction.”
So we see something happened here.
Saul developed, or had,
his motives for one point only:
using Jehovah’s service
—this commission—
to do what?
To glorify himself, to benefit himself.
In fact, if you look in verse 12,
he even went so far as to go to Carmel
and erect a monument to himself
—glorifying this great victory
that he performed over the Amalekites
and bringing King Agag back with him
(as perhaps a trophy)
to show everyone
that he dominated this nation, got rid of them,
and enriched himself
by these beautiful animals
that would no doubt benefit
the herds that they had.
Well,
was Jehovah fooled by this?
Obviously not.
Jehovah saw right through it.
He saw right to the core of the matter
that Saul’s motives were not pure.
And so when he sent Samuel to the camp,
he told Samuel to tell Saul
he had basically been condemned,
ripping the rulership away from him.
He was no longer pleasing to Jehovah God.
Saul, though, before he heard
this denunciation from Jehovah,
thought he was still in good stead with God,
and he was putting on a big show
of being a servant of God, a faithful man.
He said in verse 13:
“May Jehovah bless you [when he saw Samuel].
I have carried out the word of Jehovah.”
And Samuel set him straight:
‘No you didn’t.
You were lying.
You were seeking your own glory
and not Jehovah’s glory.’
Well, what can we learn from this account?
It’s a very good account to have in mind
because it’s a sharp contrast,
or an acute example,
of what we’re discussing here today
about motives.
We see that Saul’s motives were not pure.
He was not putting Jehovah first in his life,
and, in fact, his impure motives
moved him to an unfaithful course with God,
meeting up with his strong judgment
against him.
How can we avoid
making such a terrible mistake
in succumbing
to perhaps impure reasonings or motives
that we might have in our hearts?
How can ‘we even know it’
—as the Bible says—
that it’s there?
Well, Jehovah does help us read our motives
and understand what’s going on.
At Hebrews 4:12,
we can see that Jehovah has given us
a marvelous tool to do that.
It says:
“For the word of God is alive
“and exerts power
and is sharper than any two-edged sword
“and pierces even to the dividing
of soul and spirit,
“and of joints from the marrow,
and is able to discern
thoughts and intentions of the heart.”
So it’s no wonder that we are given
strong admonition from the faithful slave
to read God’s Word, the Bible, every day.
It’s by means of this amazing tool
that can pierce through
and slice through the hard shell
of our figurative, imperfect hearts
that it is revealed what’s really there.
And then we can do something about it.
You see, as we learned
in this past week’s Watchtower—
What a wonderful article it was!
And what beautiful guidance it gave us
about how to gain strength from God’s Word
and also how to accomplish
this very difficult assignment, if you will,
of knowing what’s in our hearts!
Here we are told
that before we read God’s Word,
we should pray, ask Jehovah’s spirit
to guide and direct us,
and then after reading it,
imagine that we are there
in the very account that we’re reading
—in the shoes of the ones
that we’re talking about.
Meditate on these things.
Understand what is truly going on
in our hearts.
How does this information apply
to me personally?
And then apply what we learn.
And you see, by doing that,
well, then we can not only reveal
what’s going on inside of our hearts
but then we can take steps
to correct our motives
if they need correcting.
Perhaps as young brothers,
we desire to reach out for service
as a privilege in the congregation.
It’s a wonderful thing to reach out
to be a ministerial servant, to be an elder.
But what are the true motives?
Why do we want this assignment?
Well, this is where following
this four-step procedure that we learned
can help.
Why not read all the qualifications
that a ministerial servant
or an elder should have?
Meditate upon them.
Apply these things in our life
and ask ourselves:
‘Why do I really want
to be a servant in the congregation?
‘Is it to glorify myself, to promote myself,
or to actually do the work?’
Imagine ourselves being Timothy or Paul
or other faithful men mentioned in the Bible
who expended themselves
and poured themselves out
on behalf of God’s people
in doing Jehovah’s will,
even perhaps being looked down upon
both by those in the congregation
as well as on the outside.
Are we willing to do that?
Actually,
all of us who desire theocratic assignments
should go through this kind of procedure
to make sure that our hearts
—our motives, really—
are in harmony with Jehovah’s will
for this assignment
as well as what he wants for us.
Doing this, perhaps maybe we find
that we may be harboring a Saul-like motive
and perhaps want to use Jehovah’s service
for self-interests and to promote ourselves.
I think it was interesting
several years ago back in 2016
at the “Remain Loyal to Jehovah” convention
—perhaps you recall the the symposium
“Avoid What Erodes Loyalty”—
and there it gave the experience
of an elder who was taking the lead,
how he was revealed.
His motives were revealed
by some counsel that an elder had given him,
and he saw
that he wasn’t responding correctly.
So, what did he do?
He prayed to Jehovah,
and then he took on assignments
in the congregation that no one ever saw,
working after hours, perhaps when no one
was at the Kingdom Hall,
doing things
that would not put him in the limelight.
Yet, it was necessary work
—work that needed to be done
to carry out God’s will and purpose.
This eventually changed his heart.
And as we understand from that video
and that brother in the basement
taking the lead with the brothers there,
it actually saved his life
to make these changes and helped.
And Jehovah used him
to appropriately shepherd the flock
during the great tribulation.
Well, that’s a good example for us.
That’s what we want to do, and we can.